[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
Maria Wheatley
has been dowsing
since she was a child,
having been taught
by her father, who
was a legend in the field.
She's able to check
into everything
from the characteristics
of sacred sites
to human intention.
But one of her favorite
topics is the mysteries
of the human species.
In this conversation,
we're going
to take a look at the little
known elongated skulls
from the area around Stonehenge.
Maria, welcome.
>>MARIA WHEATLEY: Thank you.
>>REGINA: What an incredibly
useful tool to have passed down
from father to daughter.
But dowsing, to be able to
look into the world of energy
and have it reflect back
information from the field
itself.
Talk about this
a little bit when
you were a little
girl with your father
and when he first taught
you to dowse and all that.
>>WHEATLEY: Yeah, it
is a wonderful skill.
It's an extension
of our sixth sense.
And I'm really
passionate about dowsing.
Because where I got
taught at a very young age
by my late father at ancient
sites such as Avebury
and Stonehenge,
everybody else was
playing with balls and yoyos and
there I was, you know, dowsing.
And realizing that there
was something in the earth.
And that Gaia's energies
and voltages and her being,
her consciousness reflects
through ancient sites.
So for me, dowsing is
about understanding
not just the ancient
sites, but about Gaia
and reconnecting
back to our past
so that we can look
forward to our future.
>>REGINA: So did
your dad start you
out dowsing for
water and so forth?
Did you use dowsing rods
or did you use a pendulum
or what kind of
tools did he give you
and what were the very
first things you dowsed?
>>WHEATLEY: That's a
really good question.
Yes, the first thing I
dowsed was with L-rods.
And that's your standard
L-shaped copper and nickel
rod for water.
I mean, it's so easy for
anybody to find water.
It is so ingrained in our
kind of DNA from our ancestors
that we can find it everywhere.
So I find it really
strange that you
know, some countries
such as South Africa,
for example, say they're going
to be running out of water.
Because a really
good water diviner
can find water anywhere.
Because water is born with
inside the Earth as well as
rainfall.
So I started off with water.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
I didn't know until
just a few years ago
that on our family's
farm property
my father had actually
hired a dowser to find out
where to drill the well.
I found out all kinds
of interesting things
about him as he's
become quite elderly.
He was open at that time--
this was in the '70s,
so a number of years ago--
he was open to this subject
that I had no idea
of at the time.
Because most people in America
still don't know what dowsing
is.
>>WHEATLEY: Yes.
It can find water.
It can find any
substance, really.
And it can even allow us to
find our energies in our home.
So dowsing is
very, very diverse.
It can really help
humanity move on
and to live in
harmony with Gaia.
And that's where
my passion lies is
about understanding
the energies,
decoding a hotel like
this, decoding Stonehenge,
and allowing us
to really resonate
with the frequencies
of the earth.
>>REGINA: And your father,
too, he was noted in his field.
He had one of the
largest bodies of work
in terms of geodetic
knowledge in England, right?
>>WHEATLEY: That's correct.
>>REGINA: Let's talk
about that a little bit
about what he
contributed before we
start going into this
incredibly fascinating story
about the skulls.
>>WHEATLEY: Sure.
My late father inherited a
lot of work by a master dowser
called Guy Underwood.
And Guy Underwood was
around in the sort
of 1930s and the 1940s.
And he was at a very good
stage looking at ancient sites,
because this was before
the Second World War.
So Stonehenge had different
monuments surrounding it that
got plowed out in the 1940s.
>>REGINA: Oh, yes.
>>WHEATLEY: So he recorded
the ancient landscape
and surveyed it and
connected to the energies
there, because he created
his own type of dowsing rod.
He was quite unique.
It's a bit difficult to use.
But that allowed
very fine tuning
to all different types
of frequencies at places
like Stonehenge,
Malta, Egypt, Greece.
This man, Guy Underwood,
was on a mission
to find our ancient
sites around the world.
And my late father
inherited all of that work,
of which I've inherited.
>>REGINA: Oh, lucky you.
>>WHEATLEY: Definitely.
>>REGINA: OK.
Let's go to Stonehenge.
Let's go post-World War II.
And let's talk about military
installations in that region,
because nobody thinks of that
when they think of Stonehenge.
But so much has been
basically tracked over
by tanks and other kinds of
military-- in military games
and in wartime
and such that much
has been disturbed
and destroyed.
So let's talk about the
military presence in that region
and some of the
alterations that have
happened as a result
of its presence there.
>>WHEATLEY: Stonehenge
is surrounded
by military establishment
after military establishment.
It's on what's called
the Salisbury Plain.
And the Salisbury Plain is
literally owned and managed
by the military, the MOD
as we call it in the UK.
And there, Stonehenge is
at kind of near center.
So if you imagine 26
miles around Stonehenge
of controlled military activity.
But our ancient ancestors
knew, as did the military,
that there was something
so unique and so special
about the Salisbury
Plain because you
find more concentration
of ancient sites
on Salisbury Plain than anywhere
else in the British Isles.
Our ancestors created
up to 2,500 monuments
alone in that 26
by 26 mile zone.
And you can't have access to
some parts of the Salisbury
Plain.
So I've often
likened it to Area 51
in America, because it's denied
passage for the average person
to go there.
And within this
military zone, you
have some of the most
unusual monuments
that house the most unusual
people in the landscape.
Cannot be coincidental.
Nor can it be coincidental
that Stonehenge, for example,
is on a ley line.
That's a kind of
energy line that links
Stonehenge to our top bio--
well, it's a place where you
make kind of nuclear weapons
and you can make a kind of
chemicals and warfare stuff.
And it's called Porton Down.
So in Porton Down you have a lot
of chemicals made for warfare.
And bang, its on an energy line.
So I really do feel that
the military have a control
over Stonehenge to a degree.
But I also feel
that Stonehenge can
be activated by people like
ourselves that go there
and raise our
consciousness there.
>>REGINA: You know,
it's interesting.
Because in Sedona, where
I've lived since 2000,
basically, took a little
break for a while,
but it's been said--
I remember one
evening I was told
by a man who was working
in exotic technology
development for the
military, he told
me there were six military
bases within a 30 mile
radius of Sedona.
Again, one of these sacred sites
with very powerful energies
emanating from it.
And then I think of
the ancient city of Ur.
The US went in to Iraq
and immediately took over,
which is by William
Henry's work,
I think considered to be one of
the star gates on the planet.
We took over that area.
We built a US Embassy
apparently around it,
surrounding it or something.
So the public no
longer has access
to this incredibly ancient
sacred site in Iraq.
So there seems to be
an interesting alliance
between military
and sacred sorts
in a kind of
distorted way, right?
They're looking for something.
>>WHEATLEY: That's
really interesting
that you've made
the analogy to Ur.
Because when we look to the
ancient writings of Claudius
Ptolemy, he was an
astrologer at around about 1
AD that was studying at
the Alexandrian Library
in Egypt, which is world famous.
He read some ancient
books on astrology.
And according to the Egyptians
then, the center of the world,
as they saw it, was
a very sacred place.
It's where two
major lines crossed.
And you can even read
this today in his book.
It's still in print.
It's incredible.
>>REGINA: Again, the name of
the book and the author again.
>>WHEATLEY: It's
Claudius Ptolemy.
>>REGINA: OK, yes.
>>WHEATLEY: And he wrote a
book called "Tetrabiblos."
And within
"Tetrabiblos," he said
there's two large
energy lines that divide
the world into four quarters.
Sort of North,
South, West, East.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>WHEATLEY: And that
center is Aleppo.
>>REGINA: Oh, interesting.
Absolutely fascinating.
I mean, again, now an
epicenter for such strife.
But again, these
parallels that you
have the light and the
dark existing side by side.
And that's something
I find fascinating.
When you come to these
sacred sites, oftentimes
some of the most
sacred sites, Sedona
included, have some of the
darkest activity going on
almost beneath the surface, even
if it's not beneath the ground.
Where you have cults and
you have satanic cults even,
for example.
And then on the
other hand, you have
these absolutely amazing
kinds of people and groups
and gatherings of generosity
and love and light.
And I assume it's the same
around Stonehenge, Glastonbury,
and a lot of these
places in England.
You're going to find these
polarized experiences
because they're all drawn
for the same reason, right.
>>WHEATLEY: Yeah.
I think you're
very correct there.
You do have light and dark
entwined at these sites,
you really do.
But I also feel that, you
know, we with our consciousness
and with our enlightenment
and with our awareness,
we can interact
with the energies
there, what we call as
Druids the spirits of place
and the ancestors to raise our
own consciousness and hopefully
the consciousness of
our brothers and sisters
on the planet.
So they are key places
that can change.
They're game changers.
>>REGINA: Yes, absolutely.
Because it's just raw energy.
And you can take it
up and suck it upward
or you can take it downward.
You know, it's just power,
raw power, raw energy, right.
And so in this
area, the ancestors
were obviously drawn
to it for a reason.
And you have some ancestors in
what are called long barrows,
that a lot of these military
vehicles and tanks and such
have basically run over
and razed, so to speak.
Tell us about the long barrows
and what they represent
in terms of burial
chambers normally
compared to what you're talking
about and have discovered here.
>>WHEATLEY: Yes.
So a long barrow,
especially the long barrows
on Salisbury Plain, are very
different to long barrows
anywhere else in the country.
So that makes them
very, very unique.
And if we imagine that
some of these long barrows
can be up to 390 feet long,
made of earth and chalk brick.
So if you imagine like
a brick house in the UK,
you get that chalk effect
and then a very low mound.
At one end you have
a kind of dip down
section of the barrow,
which is where you have
what's called internal chambers.
And these internal chambers
can be about four feet high.
Some of them can be five feet
high on the Salisbury Plain
and sometimes a
little bit lower.
Originally, they were designed
to be initiation chambers,
places where you would
go for ceremony or ritual
or to change one's
consciousness.
That was called
their primary use.
Then their secondary use was
to be used as burial chambers.
And that was when the skulls
and the long bones, that's
like the leg bone, and
some of the vertebrae bones
of the spine were placed
within these chambers.
So archaeologists have now
labeled all long barrows burial
chambers.
But originally, they had
nothing to do with death.
And slowly, the
archaeological community
is changing their minds and
calling them tomb shrines.
So we need to think that
originally these were literally
conscious changing spacings.
>>REGINA: Hm-mm.
They were used for
initiations of various kinds.
>>WHEATLEY: Exactly.
>>REGINA: And it was
Tilshead, right, the Tilshead
long barrow.
>>WHEATLEY: Yes.
>>REGINA: That is
the one in particular
that we're going to be
talking about, right.
And this was one of the--
first of all, as I
recall in your book,
normally a barrow
would have a number
of people buried in it if it had
become a burial chamber, right.
And let's talk about
what you would normally
find in one of these.
>>WHEATLEY: That's correct.
In an average long
barrow on Salisbury Plain
or anywhere in the British
Isles and Northwest Europe,
you would have a long barrow
used for lots of people,
sometimes up to 49.
If we turn to Wales,
you have one long barrow
that had up to 1,000
people interned.
So the Old Ditch
Barrow, Tilshead Barrow
on the Salisbury Plain being
the largest in the area
of Northwest Europe.
Its huge, colossal.
>>REGINA: It's the largest
in Britain, isn't it?
>>WHEATLEY: The largest in
Britain and Northwest Europe.
>>REGINA: Yes, OK.
>>WHEATLEY: It is
huge, it's colossal.
It's like a serpent
across the landscape.
You know, you have-- if you
want to take a picture of it,
you have to stand back a long
way to get it into focus.
So why not--
>>REGINA: Do people,
first of all,
does the public have
access to this area?
>>WHEATLEY: Sometimes.
Sometimes you have
access to different parts
of the Salisbury Plain.
So sometimes yes, you can.
And sometimes no you can't.
If they're doing a military
exercise in the area
it's a no go zone.
>>REGINA: And so what
would the closest
stop be if you were traveling
around by train, for example?
>>WHEATLEY: The
closest stop would
be a place called Tilshead,
which is a village not far
from the barrow, which is
completely kind of military.
There's a lot of military
activity in the area,
and you know, barracks
and establishments.
Yeah, this barrow is very
unique and very special
because it's the largest
and it didn't contain
a colossal amount of people
of the Salisbury Plain, which
is what I was expecting to find
by reading antiquarian reports.
And when I studied
the barrow, it
came to light that this was made
for one person and one person
alone.
And this person was a woman.
And you hardly ever hear of
women in prehistoric Britain
except for one very famous lady,
who has a statue here in London
called Boudica, who was
an Iceni Iron Age queen.
But apart from her,
you hear nothing
of the British
prehistoric womanhood.
And so when I discovered
that, I thought that is truly
an incredible moment.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
Let's talk a little bit about
her and about her features.
Let's talk about how
it appeared she died,
the uniqueness of
having been buried
after that under
such circumstance
and this very kind of royal way.
And then we'll start going
into society at that time.
>>WHEATLEY: Sure.
Well, the one thing--
>>REGINA: Just
tell us the story.
>>WHEATLEY: Yeah.
The story starts off on
a very cold February day.
And I was kind of drawn to
look at a map of the Stonehenge
environs.
I love Stonehenge.
I love ancient sites.
And you think, you know, after
going to Stonehenge 101 times
I'd be bored of it.
I'm not.
I know there's more and
more to be discovered.
So I had a map of
Stonehenge and I
did a dowsing technique
called the two point fix.
And that's where you take
a pendulum along the top--
>>REGINA: Sounds
like a card game.
>>WHEATLEY: Yeah.
And then you take a
pendulum along the bottom
and you draw two lines.
And where X marks
the spot, bingo,
you should have
something quite special.
And that's what most
dowsers use to find things.
I decided to do
something very different.
I decided to spiritualize
this dowsing process.
Instead of me
asking the question,
I asked the landscape of
Stonehenge, tell me your story
and I'll try and find
out a bit about it
and I will be your voice.
And I kind of did that in
a prayer sort of moment.
And then I did the two point
fix and it was on that barrow.
And that's why I went to that
barrow in the first place.
I try to utilize
all of my skills,
you know, my sensitive
side as well.
And I went on a very
cold February morning.
And I laid on the barrow.
I just laid on the barrow and
said, let me hear your story.
And that's when
the research began.
And I researched,
it was the lady.
And then I researched that she
was in Cambridge University.
And that was after much ado.
Because I had
phoned up Cambridge,
because I looked it up
on an antiquarian report.
Her skull was sent in the
1800s to Cambridge University.
So I called them, you know.
And I said, you know, you've got
this skull here from Tilshead
long barrow.
Please may I investigate
it, research it?
And they said, well, you have
to have the catalog number.
I said, OK.
Could you give me
the catalog number?
Well, no.
>>REGINA: No.
>>WHEATLEY: You have to find it.
So that was much ado.
But I did--
I'm very--
>>REGINA: Persistent.
>>WHEATLEY: Persistent, that's
a fantastic way to describe me,
actually, it really is.
And so I ended up at
Cambridge University gloved up
with special gloves.
You go into an air
conditioned environ.
And there she was,
presented to me on a desk,
literally, in a big warehouse.
I looked to my right, and all
I could see for about 20 feet
high by 40 feet long were
cardboard boxes with Abydos
male, Abydos female
all along one side.
And then the other
side a lot of skulls
from the British
Isles and Ireland.
And these have never been
seen for many, many decades.
And I was really
surprised when I
looked at the last time
this skull had been seen on
like an old fashioned
library card--
you'd think Cambridge University
would have gone digital--
but you signed in and
looked at his old card.
And it said about the 1930s.
And then I realized
when I looked at her,
you know, goodness me.
She has a long skull.
She has an elongated skull.
She is different to you and I.
>>REGINA: And the way she died.
And then starting to look at
other similar elongated skulls
in the regions and that
region and the way they died,
it becomes also an
interesting story.
Who were these people
with the elongated skulls?
And of course, when we
think of elongated skulls,
we think of two
things immediately.
We either think of the skulls
in Peru or we think Egypt--
Tutankhamun,
Nefertiti, Akhenaten,
their family with that
elongated skull, which you also
liken to that skull through some
of the pictures in your book.
>>WHEATLEY: That's correct.
I mean, we do think of
Paracas straight away
and the cone heads,
as often they've
be coined, with red hair.
And we do.
We have nobody prior
to this research
had even thought about elongated
skulls in the British Isles.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>WHEATLEY: They do now.
But prior to that, no.
It was almost like
from the 1920s onwards
nobody had gone to
Cambridge University
and looked in these boxes.
I truly think there are
far, far more discoveries
in Cambridge and Oxford.
>>REGINA: I'm sure.
>>WHEATLEY: Absolutely.
And I've studied the Oxford
University archeology
and I know in their
Bodleian Library
there are a lot of
gifts for humanity
if we could find out
the information there.
>>REGINA: If you could
get the catalog number.
>>WHEATLEY: If you could get
the catalog number, precisely.
>>REGINA: Oh my god, it's
almost a riddle of some kind
to be kept away from people.
So let's talk about
the manner of her death
and then let's talk about
some of the other barrows
and elongated skulls
in the region.
>>WHEATLEY: Yes.
She died very suddenly.
She had been murdered,
probably to a very strong blow
by a right handed assailant
to the back of her head.
She was quite short.
We know this because of
the long bone measurements.
You can easily ascertain the
height and the probable weight
of somebody.
>>REGINA: So what would
her height have been?
>>WHEATLEY: About 5 foot 4.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>WHEATLEY: So
they weren't tall.
>>REGINA: My height, yeah.
>>WHEATLEY: Yeah.
It's a good height.
>>REGINA: They weren't giants.
>>WHEATLEY: Right.
She wasn't a giant.
But I really do feel with the
shape of her head being long
skulled, these people, they
were the first to really look
into the energy system of ley
lines and of earth energies.
Why do I say that?
It's because the long barrows,
causewayed enclosures,
cursus monuments, the
Neolithic monument of her era,
the earliest in
the United Kingdom,
were laid out in straight lines.
So perhaps their
sensitivity of their skull
shape, they had larger
brain capacities,
this has been shown
in report after report
from Paracas for example,
the same as for the UK,
these large brain capacities.
But moreover, what about
a metaphysical sensitivity
to the land could
have prevailed,
which allowed them to see
these highly energetic areas.
But sadly, when I looked to
the other barrows in the area
surrounding hers
at Stonehenge, it
came to light that
it wasn't just
this lady who I call the high
queen or the high priestess
of Stonehenge that got murdered.
All the long skulled
elongated sculled people
in the Stonehenge
environs also had
been murdered, mostly to a
blow to the back of the head
by a right hand assailant.
>>REGINA: OK, in
a moment we'll get
into who those assailants may
have been or it appeared were.
But you know, it's
interesting as you
talk about the elongated skulls
and their particular abilities
or sensitivities these
people may have had.
Because if you're talking
about elongated skull,
you're talking about enhanced
parietals and occipital,
right, function in the brain.
And a lot of the more, I guess,
reflective intuitive kinds
of abilities come off of
this region in the parietals.
And so interesting
that they have these
enhanced proportions
to the brain.
So there may have
had a higher degree
of perhaps like
telepathic abilities
or even intellectual
capacities as well.
>>WHEATLEY: I agree.
I really do agree with that.
Because I think
their skull shape
was apparently very
different to ours.
And I do feel it increased
their sensitivity.
And there was one
researcher who I
think it was back
in the 1980s made
a very good point about
mankind's evolution
maybe through the Neolithic,
maybe a little bit earlier
in what's called the Mesolithic
period, which is about 10,000,
you know, 15,000 years ago.
It could be that at some point
in their evolutionary history
that their senses crossed over.
I mean, our prevalent senses
now our sight and hearing.
And maybe for these
ancient people
it could have been
smell and sight.
And when it crossed
over to the senses that
prevail for us today, maybe
they could have seen and heard
color, for example.
They could have heard color.
And their senses could
have crossed over.
>>REGINA: Makes sense,
because occipitals
are responsible for sight.
Yes, that makes perfect sense
if they're enhanced or enlarged.
So these people also,
as you say in your book,
there's evidence they had a more
preferred diet, for example,
a better diet than the
surrounding people that
populated the area afterward
or a more superior diet.
Is that correct?
>>WHEATLEY: Yes.
I mean, the way they grew
their food, if we start
looking at the layout of
ancient field systems,
it's a quite a boring
topic, because it's not
exotic like looking at
a pyramid, for example.
But if we look at that kind
of practical everyday life,
then they laid the field
systems out just like a temple,
like facing the summer
solstice, facing the equinox.
And that would be called a
co-axial line of the fields.
And then they would align
them to different types
of earth energy.
And I feel that made a
better crop grow faster.
It was recorded in
ancient Greece--
England had a good climate then.
They had perfect climate.
Unbelievable today.
>>REGINA: Yes, yes.
>>WHEATLEY: They
had a better climate
and they would grow in
food for two harvests
a year to supply ancient Greece.
How are they achieving that?
I think they were aligning
their fields to earth energies.
And if only we could
turn back the clock
and not have so many
chemicals on our food
now and look into these
old ways of growing food,
I think our children
and ourselves
would be far healthier.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
Well, those movements do
exist, the organic movements.
But also biodynamic
and anthroposophical
gardening as well.
These are fairly available,
you know, to study,
if one wishes to grow a
garden in the old way,
you know, with
the old knowledge.
One of the things
you also say is
that in the burial
chamber itself,
it had layered materials, almost
an orgone type of energy that
was emanating from there.
Talk about this a little bit.
Because they would have been the
ones that had established that,
right?
>>WHEATLEY: Exactly.
The Neolithic people
for about 5 and 1/2
thousand years ago, if
we use orthodox dating--
I actually put the clock
back a bit further.
There's new evidence coming
out from Oxford University that
will put the clock
back to Mesolithic.
>>REGINA: How much further?
>>WHEATLEY: Probably
about 10,000 BC.
>>REGINA: OK.
Interesting.
>>WHEATLEY: That will come
out quite soon, actually.
As soon as one report
is out there, bingo,
everything's going to
change in time lines.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>WHEATLEY: By a
very simple piece
of evidence which I'm not
prepared to say today,
because the paper has got to be
written by the archaeologists.
But it will change everything.
So I really do feel that
these elongated skulled people
with the layout of their
food systems and their mounds
that they created
were very special.
They would place the mound on a
particular earth energy point.
It could be a ley line.
More often than not, very
deep underground water
mixed with earth currents
that release voltages.
So an earth current
can release a voltage.
Now they used to structure
their mounds in a particular way
that you mentioned.
And that's they would create
a layer of organic material,
inorganic material, and so on.
And they would layer that up.
The finest example of
which is a later monument
in the Bronze Age built
by the Bronze Age people,
but that's Silbury Hill.
And that's a huge
orgone generator.
Because every single layer
there goes organic, inorganic.
And when I did some tests with
a chap called David Webb who's
an engineer, we took
the electrostatic field
at the bottom and compared
it to the electrostatic field
at the top, and it was
1,000 times greater.
So Silbury Hill kicks
out energy, basically.
You can't see it.
Some people can feel it.
It kind could give
you some goosebumps
if you're on top of the mound.
And the long skulled people
were the first to create
that technology in
the ancient landscape.
So when we look at
a barrow, we need
to think it's not
just a burial chamber.
It's not just an
initiation chamber.
It's an energy capsule,
to a certain degree,
that can enhance the earth
energies upon which it's sited.
>>REGINA: Hmm, interesting.
Now a lot of these--
a lot of these bones and skulls
were dug up by John Thurnam.
>>WHEATLEY: That's right.
>>REGINA: Dr. John Thurnam,
right, and spirited away.
So we don't have
access to a lot of it.
I mean, in earlier times, in
earlier archaeological digs,
it sounds as though
the archaeologists were
respectful of the fact
that this is a burial place
and would often
leave things intact.
They would check into
it and leave it intact.
But this man was
rather aggressive
in his cataloging and
collecting, right?
>>WHEATLEY: Yes.
>>REGINA: So what is
the implication of that?
>>WHEATLEY: Yes.
That's right.
Because when you had the
turn of the 19th century,
basically, if you had a lot of
money and you were a landowner
and you had a shovel, you
could dig where you wanted to.
But they were respectful.
And that was Sir Richard Colt
Hoare and William Cunnington.
And what they did they
would do the finds
like the Neolithic high
queen on Salisbury Plain,
and they would put it back.
And they would put
a coin of their era
by it to say this was
the year it was dug.
Along came John Thurnam and
he was very disrespectful
and some would say obsessive.
Because he started to hoard
skull after skull after skull
after skull.
And his collection was immense.
It contained all of
the Stonehenge environs
and a lot of the long
barrow finds from the whole
of the southwest of England.
So he had an extensive
archive which
he dedicated to,
after his death,
incidentally, to
Cambridge University.
>>REGINA: I was going to say, so
that is where it's housed now.
Have they ever done
any DNA testing?
>>WHEATLEY: No.
>>REGINA: What the heck?
I mean, this is the one thing
that comes up in this field
over and over again.
You find these anomalies
and they say, oh well,
nobody's bothered
having the DNA tested.
Why?
That makes no sense.
>>WHEATLEY: It makes no sense
because maybe DNA testing would
be somewhat problematic
to a certain degree
on the Neolithic high queen
because during transportation
in the 19th century she
got a little bit battered
and part of her skull broke and
she was glued back together.
So that is called contaminated.
But you could go into her
teeth and her isotopes
and take isotope
samples and find out
where she was, you know,
first drinking her water,
eating her food, that type of
thing to build up a picture.
But Cambridge University,
when I asked, you know,
I asked for DNA because I know
other researchers are looking
to the skulls of Paracas.
And you've interviewed
Andy Collins,
he's looked into the tall
people of Europe and beyond.
And yes, they do.
But no, Cambridge won't do that.
They don't want the DNA testing.
>>REGINA: So let's now
talk about the lifestyle
in the day of these people.
They had this more advanced
agricultural practices
and so forth.
But there were concurrently
another species
with round skulls.
And you find these in the
rounded mountains or barrows,
right?
The burials are in
round one rather than
these elongated barrows
for the elongated skulls.
Let's talk about what you
know of the other people.
And what do you know of them?
What do you know of them maybe
even on a DNA or genetic level?
And what do you know
of how they were living
and if they were the ones that
murdered the elongated skulls?
And have people pieced this
together kind of historically?
>>WHEATLEY: Historically,
nobody has pieced this
together except a
researcher, you know,
such as myself that I had looked
into the antiquarian reports
through the moment of dowsing.
I mean, and yet, Cambridge
University, like I say,
ignored it.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>WHEATLEY: But
during that research,
one barrow stood out as quite
a kind of research gold.
It's called Belas
Knap long barrow.
And it's situated in a beautiful
county in the Cotswolds
in England called
Gloucestershire.
It is very nice, and I'd
recommend anyone listening
to this show Google it, you will
go there and it's fantastic.
It's what's called
a horned barrow
and very different from the
Salisbury Plain long barrows.
It's like a kind
of tureen shape,
you know, with these horns
that come out like this.
It's very beautiful.
Now an archaeologist
was reevaluating
the finds of Belas Knap.
And he found at what's
called the false entrance you
have these huge kind of earthen
horns with a false entrance.
Why the ancients did
that is still a mystery,
because you had
chambers at the side
with this huge false
entrance front.
But placed side by side in
this false entrance wall
was an elongated skull
next to a round skull.
And at first the
archaeologists thought,
oh, it's a later edition.
The round skull went
in much, much later.
But it turned out
through radiocarbon
dating that they
were contemporary.
So these people, at one point,
were cohabiting, living side
by side in the British Isles.
>>REGINA: What was the stature
of the round skulled people,
roughly?
Were they the same height
and the same height
range as the elongated
skulled people?
Or with they larger, smaller?
>>WHEATLEY: They were probably
larger, it is thought.
Because when you start to
look at the finds in the round
barrows that
surround Stonehenge,
especially a place
called Woodyates,
which is a huge round
barrow cemetery, that you
find very, very tall people.
I'm talking beyond six foot six.
Some could be reaching
seven feet and beyond that.
In fact, one barrow
from Stonehenge,
someone that had a stature of
13 feet came out of the ground.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
So these were larger people.
And they murdered a lot of
the elongated skulled people,
as you found in your
research, with cracked skulls,
for example.
And it sounds as though if
they were of larger stature,
that would not have been
difficult to accomplish.
So has anyone looked
into it intuitively even
to see what the elongated
people were bringing
to the equation that was
threatening to the others
that they would had to have been
murdered by the round skulled
taller people of the day?
Was it just that
they were different?
Did they possess something
that others wished to possess?
Or what was it, do you think?
>>WHEATLEY: I think one
important fact is lifestyle.
The elongated people
were more communal.
They would live more together.
They didn't have land ownership.
In England in the Neolithic, you
didn't have land ownership, OK.
So you didn't have
fenced off fields.
You didn't have this is my land.
When it came to the Bronze Age
and the building of the round
barrows by the round skulled
people they started to dominate
and divide the land up.
This is my part of the land.
So it was a completely
different lifestyle and culture.
And you know, it must've been
a really big thing for them
in the day.
Because if you are
used to a culture
and another culture
comes in and says
this isn't happening
anymore, it is
going to either lead to
conflict or resolving.
And I don't think it resolved
in the Stonehenge environs.
So I think the first
thing was the land
no longer was belonged by all,
it was belonged by the few.
And we find, when we look into
the round barrows of especially
the Late and Middle Bronze Age,
that you have masses of wealth.
And personalized,
one person would
go into the round barrows
full of wealth, gold, finds,
and things like that it.
It was a case of the ego
grew more and more and more
in the Bronze Age.
And you had more and more
what's called ranch boundaries.
That's huge land division
crossing the Salisbury
Plain for up to 20 miles.
>>REGINA: I mean, I
find this fascinating.
And most of your countrymen
aren't aware of this story
either, I assume.
>>WHEATLEY: No.
>>REGINA: This is still
very little known.
OK.
So we had these
ancient cultures.
And it will remain a
mystery until DNA testing
is done as to who the elongated
skulled smaller people were.
And so is there
anything else you'd
like to pass on
regarding that story
before we go on to ley lines and
some more general information
about male and female,
Mary and Michael lines
and sacred sites and the like?
>>WHEATLEY: I'd just like to say
there was one DNA testing done
of what's called Cheddar Man.
And Cheddar Man comes
from Somerset in the UK.
And they did some DNA
testing recently on him.
He had a good surviving amount
in his skull and in his teeth.
And what they found was he
was very dark skinned, very
Mediterranean, but
with blue eyes.
So he would have been
quite striking to look at.
>>REGINA: Was this a
round skulled person?
>>WHEATLEY: Well, it
was an in between.
It wasn't elongated,
it wasn't round.
And it's a very famous
find called Cheddar Man.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>WHEATLEY: But
at Oxford, that's
what they released to the media.
But behind the scenes
in nature magazine
and journals that
you subscribe to,
they were saying
one step further.
Not only could he have been
very dark Mediterranean,
he could have even been black.
>>REGINA: Were there other
remains found like Cheddar Man
or was he a sole person who
wandered into this region?
>>WHEATLEY: It's
difficult to say,
because he died within the
cave system in Somerset,
so he was a lone find.
But nonetheless, his DNA is
challenging the perception
of the ancient Britons.
>>REGINA: I suppose
it is, especially
with all your strawberries and
rosy cheeks now and everything.
OK, let's move on to the system
of ley lines and the notion
that animals know to
follow these lines, even.
They instinctively know
where these energy lines are.
So let's talk about
ley lines a bit.
>>WHEATLEY: Yeah, you've
got lots of different types
of leys, for example.
But one that you've
just cited, an example,
the ones that animals follow,
we call them track lines.
And the interesting
thing about track lines
is we feel as dowsers that
certain animals seem to follow
them more than others.
So for example, sheep,
horses, cows, wildebeests,
they seem to follow track lines.
And they can go for mile after
mile after mile without tiring,
so we think it energizes
the physical body.
So when ancient man
created these roadways,
which we call in
the UK ridgeways,
they're very ancient.
They go back 10,000, 15,000
years ago, ancient man
was creating these road systems,
they follow track lines.
So you could walk or
ride horses or whatever
for a long, long distance.
>>REGINA: I mean,
it makes sense.
You would follow a trail
that's already been partially
laid, on one hand,
just that ease in terms
of clearing of anything.
But did they also understand
that those animals
were following this pathway
with their own intelligence
for a reason?
>>WHEATLEY: It could well
be the case, actually.
But what we do know
through dowsing,
these energies such as
the ridgeways and leys,
they give off one
particular pattern
of three lines and
then three lines.
We call it a double
triad line, if you're
using dowsing terminology,
which is not necessary.
But it really does show you
that these lines of a ley
line rather than-- it sounds so
singular when you say ley line.
But it's actually constructed
of various different lines
that give it a kind of
force in the landscape.
>>REGINA: And then you also have
intersection points as well,
these vector points where
these lines cross and meet,
which we'll talk about as well.
And this is something that
was known even the famous John
Dee, royal astrologer,
mathematician of the day,
he talked about ley
lines back then.
So it was understood
a while back.
It's not just a modern
phenomenon, a new age
phenomenon.
>>WHEATLEY: No, not at all.
I mean, he wrote that in a book
called "Mathematical Preface."
And he pointed out there was the
immortal beams and the energy
lines.
And if you even go
to Kenilworth Castle,
for example, in the north
of England where Doctor John
Dee made the chambers
for Queen Elizabeth I,
then you will find those
are on energy lines, too.
>>REGINA: Well, of course.
And so the energy
lines are laid out
in your world in male
and female energy lines.
And the Knight
Templar, you say, were
aware of these lines in
these intersection points.
And certain sacred sites were
consecrated on those vector
points or on particular lines.
Let's talk about the
Mary and Michael lines.
>>WHEATLEY: Well,
Mary and Michael lines
were discovered in the 1980s
by a wonderful, very competent
dowser called Hamish
Miller, who I've worked with
and he forwarded one of
my books, for example.
He realized that a ley
line isn't just a line.
And this was a seminal
discovery then.
Because he looked to
the St. Michael ley line
and realized there was two
currents coiling around it,
you know, like the
caduceus figure.
If you project back that the
landscape that's a ley system.
And it has living
sentient earth energies
coiling around the ley.
The energies that
coil around the ley
are really very, very
powerful, even so more powerful
than the ley.
I pointed out to Hamish
and some other dowsers
the reason why I think those
energies coil around the ley
is the ley is anchoring
in those energies,
because they're never more than
five miles apart from the ley.
So the sophistication of
the understanding of leys
and the earth currents, our
ancestors had that knowledge.
And we're kind of
rediscovering that knowledge.
>>REGINA: Right.
And so let's talk about
some of the sacred sites
you would find, say, along
a particularly female line,
a Mary line or a Michael line.
>>WHEATLEY: Along the
female earth current--
it's coined the Mary
line, but we imagine it
as a river of
scintillating blue light.
That's how all
dowsers and geomancers
see the Mary current.
The Mary current
goes to low ground.
She will go to the
water, to springs.
She'll follow a river.
She'll go around low almost
like breast-shaped hills.
Very feminine.
Then the Knights Templar and
the secret societies and Masons,
they built churches
on the female earth
currents dedicated to a female.
In Mary's instant,
for example, it's
dedicated to Mary Magdalene.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>WHEATLEY: Or the Virgin Mary.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>WHEATLEY: So we can
understand the nature
of an earth current
in a church by whom
the church is dedicated.
>>REGINA: Let's talk
about the Michael line.
And then let's talk
about Rosslyn Chapel,
just for kicks, OK.
>>WHEATLEY: Yeah, sure.
Well, Michael, on
the other hand,
is very different to Mary.
He will sort out the very high
places like Glastonbury Tor.
And he will go to
the tops of mountains
and he'll go to very
phallic shaped stones,
for example,
targeting male energy.
And sited upon the St.
Michael current you
have churches dedicated
to dragon slayers
like St. Michael and St. George.
So it's interesting to know
that the early Christians,
the Culdees, as
they're often called,
which was a crossover of
Druidism to Christianity
knew this science and
dedicated the churches to them.
>>REGINA: That's fascinating.
Now let's go to Rosslyn
Chapel in Scotland, OK.
And what do we have there
in terms of ley lines?
Because that's-- well, it's
become popularized for sure.
But it's a very
interesting place
when you look at the
artwork and carvings
on the inside of
the pagan Green Man
to the very kind of strict
Christian iconography of today.
>>WHEATLEY: Yes, I think
it's a gem of Scotland.
>>REGINA: I do too.
I love it.
>>WHEATLEY: It's a real gem
for anybody to go and visit.
And it's very intriguing.
It's very intriguing from the
moment you go through the door
to the moment you leave.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>WHEATLEY: Now the one
thing that really marks out
the chapel is you have a
huge line marking the access
line from east to west.
What the Christians
did, the pagans,
to try understand
this concept fully,
the pagans loved
everything circular.
They would look for--
>>REGINA: Feminine.
>>WHEATLEY: Feminine and
circular earth energies
that are kind of
the harmonic surface
pattern of underground water.
It generates a
circle and a spiral.
The Christians came
along and thought, well,
we don't want that
kind of pagan stuff.
We'll look for the
geocross in the land.
And the geocross in the
land is like one ley
going one way and a
cross going the other.
It's a Christian symbol that
gives sanctity to that church.
So when we go to places like the
chapel, that wonderful chapel,
they have that crossing
point of those two leys.
It's the cross in the land.
And too, kind of the
Culdees, I mentioned,
which was the crossover of
Christianity from Druidism,
they would look
at these energies
and they would look at it as a
kind of body in the landscape.
So if you imagine that on
this ley crossing system
you project a body, that
the head of that body
is at the altar.
The feet are at the end.
And then the hands are laid out
just like Jesus on the cross.
>>REGINA: Oh, interesting.
>>WHEATLEY: That's
their perception.
Then the metaphysical
perception of that is it's
the crown chakra at the top.
And it's very
interesting to know,
as you walk up any
medieval church or chapel,
you go from the bottom, you
walk along the axis line,
you will go up a step to
where the choir sings.
We would recognize that.
That's the throat chakra.
Then you go up another
level, you go up another step
and you'll reach the
third eye chakra point.
And then you'll
go up another step
and you'll reach
the crown chakra.
The steps are there
to say this is raising
your consciousness to the altar,
altered state of consciousness.
>>REGINA: Thank you for that.
I just-- I'm fascinated
with that as well,
and I'm fascinated with
that particular chapel.
Just it's visually just so
interesting to spend time in.
Let's talk about before we go
into how we can use this energy
and use the dowsing ourselves
as you call to spiritualize
our homes, our own sacred
places in our own lives,
even a room in our
home, let's talk
about dragon lines and
aquastat areas just briefly.
Because dragon lines, you
say, really amplify emotions,
for example, thoughts
and emotions.
>>WHEATLEY: That's right.
Dragon lines do amplify
our thoughts and emotions.
>>REGINA: And how do we know
where a dragon line might be?
>>WHEATLEY: Yes.
I mean, it's easy
in the UK because we
have lots of ancient sites.
So you can start to plot on maps
and things, you know, a course.
And dowsing will help
you to fine tune that.
Visualizing and sensing
will help you as well.
You don't need to be
a dowser to understand
the ancient landscape,
it just helps a bit.
It was Hamish Miller that
first kind of studied
the effects of the dragon
lines upon human consciousness.
And he noticed repeatedly
that people would
go really high or really low.
So he thought, yes,
it amplifies it.
You have to be quite balanced
to live amid earth energies.
Let us not forget,
our ancient ancestors
created these ancient sites
to go to and come away from.
>>REGINA: Oh, it's very true.
Even in Sedona the
Native Americans
would go into the area
that is now Sedona.
And they would use it
for ceremony and ritual,
but they knew to
never live there.
They lived outside.
And now you have people from
all over the world living there.
And you're absolutely right.
If you're not a well balanced
and bolted together person,
the oddest things start
happening to people's lives.
And usually the experience
will kick them right out
of Sedona, usually
penniless and heartbroken.
And you know, it's fascinating.
>>WHEATLEY: That is
so true and reflective
of Avebury, of people that
go to Stonehenge too much.
I mean, I'm quite grounded.
>>REGINA: What
about Glastonbury?
>>WHEATLEY: Glastonbury is dark
and light entwined, you know.
>>REGINA: That's
how I felt there.
>>WHEATLEY: I think you're
very correct in your perception
and understanding
of Glastonbury.
Because just like Sedona, you
will get people going there
with dreams and visions.
And they will leave
with sometimes nothing.
>>REGINA: Broken. yes, exactly.
Interesting.
Let's talk about aquastat,
aquastatic energy and yin-yang
waters underneath the land.
>>WHEATLEY: Yes.
Well as a kind of water diviner
from a very young child,
my late father and other dowsers
alike always pointed out,
there's two types of water.
The first type we
call yang water.
It falls from the sky and
fills up the aquifers.
Everybody knows that.
And geologists would
be nodding away
saying yes, I'm in
agreement with that.
But we say as dowsers
there's another type of water
born within the womb of Gaia.
She perpetually and chemically
generates this water.
And where that
water breaks through
to the surface, that's your holy
spring with medicinal healing
power, yeah.
And the two give off a different
harmonic surface pattern.
That's basically what dowsers
pick up with dowsing rods.
Yang water gives a kind of
three wave in the landscape.
So if I was crossing
it, bang, bang, bang.
That's the international
sign for water.
Even if you go to a
cartouche in ancient Egypt,
a broken chevron
sign means water.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>WHEATLEY: You can
go to any culture.
So that's yang water.
Yin water, born within
the womb of Gaia,
gives off a spiral effect.
Now I've been saying this
for many, many years.
And you know, I've been
mocked for saying that,
but I say come on, Gaia produces
sulfur, plutonium, uranium.
Why wouldn't she
produce her own waters?
And thankfully,
scientists that were
looking into the deep
waters for oil and minerals
beneath Peking, modern
day Beijing, they
found that in all probability,
the rocks beneath there
were producing water.
>>REGINA: Yes.
I just had this conversation
with Manjir Samanta-Laughton
on the same subject about the
earth producing her own water.
Which is something that
needs to be very well studied
and embraced, in my opinion.
So it's more desirable
to live over yin or yang?
>>WHEATLEY: Yin.
Because the yang water
with that three kind
of pattern, energy
pattern, gives off
what's called geopathic stress.
And geopathic stress will
break down your immune system
with long term exposure.
By that, I mean you got to live
over that for over five years
minimum.
But it will break your
immune system down.
And Dr. Kathe
Bachler of Germany,
who did the most research
into geopathic stress
called them cancer houses.
>>REGINA: So how are we
able to dowse to find out
what we're living over?
How would that take place?
>>WHEATLEY: Dowse is
relatively simple.
It really is.
And anyone and
everyone can dowse.
I've taught hundreds of
people and lots of schoolkids.
I take out, you know,
children from the Netherlands.
And within five minutes I
can get anybody dowsing.
But it's really easy because
you just identify the pattern.
So it's going to be
three lines crossing
your landscape or maybe six if
there's a crossing of a stream.
And to find the healing
harmonics of aquastats or geo
spirals, they give off
more a spiral pattern.
And it's really interesting to
see the layout of stately homes
and large buildings built
by the medieval Masons.
They always were above
those spiral patterns.
They're called habitation
spirals to a diviner.
So they knew what
they were doing.
And I know that the aristocracy
had better diets than the more
kind of working class people.
But none the less,
their life expectancy
was much, much greater,
and I contribute
part of that to the land
upon which they live.
>>REGINA: OK.
Interesting.
So we need to learn--
well, first of all,
you have, I just
want to say this now,
you do a very good
job of helping people
learn how to dowse these kinds
of properties in your book.
It's a really good how-to book.
So we'll send people
there for sure.
But right now in
case anyone wants
to get a jump on it
before the book arrives,
let's talk about our own
domain, wherever we're living,
whether we're living
over a dragon line
or whether we're living
over yin or yang waters,
this is our place.
And so let's take a home
or a room, for example.
And tell us how
we can use dowsing
to help shift the energy
or spiritualize the house.
>>WHEATLEY: Yes, that's
a really good point.
Because you could be living
above leys, dragon lines,
water, and grid lines as
well, like the Curry Net
or the Hartmann Grid.
These are kind of
like global grid
systems that cover Gaia that
can be a little bit toxic.
Dowsing can lead you
to find out where
the best places for
your bed, for example,
to get off the grid, to actually
get yourself off the grid.
And you will live to
be a ripe old age.
This is what the
studies have found.
Because in one
test alone, a third
of all people in a
province of Germany
were admitted to hospital
because of geopathic stress.
Not because of an illness,
because of the breakdown.
Germany kind of leads the way
in geopathic stress currently.
But we can do lots
in our own home.
We can get very
simple devices that
don't cost much, which is
called a Lakhovsky coil.
Which anyone can look
up on the internet.
>>REGINA: Spell that.
>>WHEATLEY: No, I
won't be able to.
I can't spell.
It's called a Lakhovsky coil.
>>REGINA: Lakhovsky Coil.
>>WHEATLEY: Lakhovsky Coil.
And all that coil
is, is two pieces
of copper about a meter long.
You twist it round and
round, a bit like plait,
kind of twisting it
around like that.
Make it into a circle.
Place that in your home and
it creates an electrical field
system that diffuses
any energies.
It's not really
widely advertised
by dowsing societies,
because it's so easy to do
and they don't get a
commission from a sale.
But it empowers people.
And yes, you could
go on to the internet
and put in geographic
stress diffusers
and you'll get a million
and one that cost
anything from 50 pounds
to you know, 1,000 pound.
But those two pieces of copper
have been tried and tested
since the Russians invented it.
And it's really very, very good.
>>REGINA: That's really
useful information.
I like that kind of thing.
And so you'd certainly
want to make sure
that your bedroom, for
example, the place you sleep,
has this more balanced
energy or diffused energy
if you're in an area that's
a little toxic, right?
>>WHEATLEY: Yes.
Yes.
It's really easy to identify.
Because if you are under the
influence of geopathic stress,
you probably won't go
to sleep that fast.
You may grind your teeth.
You may avoid a
particular place in bed
by moving away from
the energy line.
The body knows what's good
and what isn't good for it.
Our mines kind of counteract
and explain things.
So I ask people when I go
into their homes to decode
their homes, how do you sleep?
Show me on your bed.
Nine times out of 10, if
they're on a grid line,
they go, you know,
I'm always kind
of in the half fetal
position and then
I move over this
side of the bed.
Strong indications.
>>REGINA: Oh, interesting.
OK, this building
we're in, we're
in the London
Marriott Hotel County
Hall, which they were the old
debate chambers for parliament
at one time in this place.
So let's talk about, did
you dowse this at all?
Do you know anything about
this building and where we are?
>>WHEATLEY: No.
To be truthful, I
haven't dowsed it.
But interestingly, being in a
traffic jam on the way here,
I was looking at particular
points in churches.
And you know, my
geomance eye start
to look for phalli and things.
And I noticed down
outside one church
and chapel there was some large
obelisks placed into the wall.
So obelisks really
pass on energy.
So that was a whole kind of
row of obelisks in the fence.
And I think it was headed
to the direction of a spire.
Now once you've got a
spire in the church,
all international
dowsers agree, that's
an interface between elements
of like earth and sky.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>WHEATLEY: And that can also
enhance and make the energy
flow even faster along any ley.
So I think, you know, I think
London has been laid out,
certainly as other places,
United States have.
There's been well
research on Washington.
>>REGINA: Washington DC, yes.
>>WHEATLEY: Exactly.
And London has been
completely built over,
but it still retains
an energy system.
>>REGINA: Well, you
can feel it when you go
to the various sites, for sure.
And we are out of time.
And it's been a
fascinating conversation.
Thank you so much for taking the
time to make your way to London
and to be here with us.
>>WHEATLEY: Thanks.
>>REGINA: Again,
the book is titled
"Divining Ancient Sites."
And also to join Maria for
a tour of ancient sites,
you can look at her website
theaveburyexperience.co.uk.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
in London on "Open Minds."
[THEME MUSIC]